---
title: HyperDex on Ubuntu 12.10 from source
date: '2013-01-16'
categories:
- NoSQL
- HyperDex
- Ubuntu
- Linux
---
So ok, I really like looking at new interesting NoSQL databases. Up until yesterday I felt [Riak](http://basho.com) was the most interesting one (have also coauthored [Phriak](http://www.smalltalkhub.com/#!/~gokr/Phriak) - a Riak binding for [Pharo Smalltalk](http://www.pharo-project.org)) but after an evening of discussing choices of key/value backends for the [Oak](/categories/oak) project I decided to "google a bit" and stumbled upon [HyperDex](http://hyperdex.org).

<!--more--> 

Without having had the pleasure to actually play with it yet - on paper - it sure looks like a killer NoSQL database. It seems to offer basically the same kind of robustness and horisontal *"just add another box"* kind of scalability that Riak offers including auto balancing etc. But at the same time it offers awesome raw speed **beating both MongoDB (without cheating like Mongo does) and even Redis**, although HyperDex is truly persistent. And to put sugar on top - it has atomic operations in Redis style and manages to somehow avoid the eventual consistency corner - not sure about the details around that.

**In summary - an extremely interesting NoSQL database.**

Building from source
--------------------

**NOTE: You don't need to build anymore, as of release 1.0.rc5 there are binaries available for Ubuntu**

The instructions on how to build HyperDex from source were a tad incomplete. So I offer the following procedure that seemed to work for me in a relatively clean Ubuntu 12.10.

First we need a bunch of tools **(updated 2013-01-17 with some corrections from Robert Escriva)**:

``` bash
sudo apt-get install git autoconf automake autoconf-archive libtool python-dev python-pyparsing cython libpopt-dev libcityhash-dev g++ libgoogle-glog-dev libleveldb-dev bison gperf flex python-sphinx
```
Then we need a bunch of git clones:
``` bash
	git clone git://git.hyperdex.org/po6.git
	git clone git://git.hyperdex.org/e.git
	git clone git://git.hyperdex.org/busybee.git
	git clone git://git.hyperdex.org/replicant.git
	git clone git://git.hyperdex.org/HyperDex.git
```
Then, in the order listed above, do the following in the first four:
``` bash
	autoreconf -i; ./configure; make && sudo make install
```
...and perhaps something like this in HyperDex:
``` bash
	autoreconf -i; ./configure --enable-python-bindings; make && sudo make install
```


If all is well you should be able to find the ```hyperdex``` command in your path and if ```hyperdex daemon --help``` provides helpful output then all is probably fine. For more details take a look in **HyperDex/doc/02.installation.rst**.

Happy hacking!

